----------------------------
Liberty-enhancing businesses
----------------------------

Making money through the freedom of others
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Licensing agreements are of vital importance the new digital economy. Successful licensing strategies limit the way others can consume creative work, placing the producer of the work in a position to maximise the profit they accrue from their efforts. 

However, the idea that all available IP rights should be enforced to maximise profit has been challenged across a number of licensing industries. Where the recording and software industry has led, more will follow as the impact of the "digital revolution" cascades through their sectors (Gershenfeld 2007). 

The commoditisation of digital hardware and software, and the democratisation of product design through digital fabrication techniques, has led to the emergence of challenging alternative business models. Open Source, Creative Commons and similarly liberal licenses underpin a growing collection of products and services without the encumbrances and transaction friction of rights-controlled resources.

The aim of my thesis will be to understand the impact of different forms of licensing strategy on the flow of value within startups releasing new designs for physical products.

Establishing the right licensing and access strategy for any product is enormously difficult. Established business models for content producers tend to choose restrictive policies and paid licenses while a counterculture of hackers and makers prefer sharing their material in the public domain, or using licenses which leave many freedoms open for others. 

Liberal licensing can help creatives to promote themselves, stimulate adoption of their designs, foster collaborations and encourage others to share valuable insights. A shift of emphasis from product to service businesses can also requires traditional assumptions to be dropped; actively facilitating the adoption of your designs by others can create a rich market for consultancy and support which the original creator is uniquely able to anticipate and serve. However, there is an absence of quantitative evidence from controlled experiments to show when liberal licensing is better, in which circumstances and why.

My PhD will investigate this question by designing tools to assess the market's response to a range of licensing strategies for physical designs. These tools will be tested by market-testing products which currently exist in prototype form. The launch vehicles for these products will be carefully crafted, drawing on ten years of commercial experience as a implementor and strategist and combining perspectives from management science to understand how experimental controls can be introduced as part of this artificial intervention in the real-world digital economy.

Experiments will compare liberal licensing agreements which allow wide use of intellectual property with those which impose a narrow enforcement of intellectual property rights. Outcomes will be monitored to see how licenses influence the behavior of stakeholders in the near term, and hypotheses put forward regarding the impact of those behaviours on long term value flow and profitability.

The results of these experiments will be made available to start-up companies trying to navigate the same difficult terrain. The thesis should help companies decide when to allow others the freedom to exploit their output, and when they should register and impose intellectual property rights to limit that freedom, in order to achieve the greatest commercial gain.

This work is a natural extension to less rigorous experimentation into public domain invention and product launches already undertaken by the author during a commercial sabbatical from his full time work at BT's Research and Development labs. From February to April 2010 the Enigmaker project microblogged the prototyping of six new inventions, released into the public domain as part of a crowd-sourced invention guessing-game. One of these, a Creative Commons licensed design branded the Tacticalendar, has since been released as a consumer product.

Rationale and Objectives
++++++++++++++++++++++++

Society profits hugely from the exchange of insight and information. Its beneficiaries build upon shared work to achieve goals which are otherwise out of their reach. However, business strategies reliant on intellectual property rights concern themselves with prevention. Through measures such as patents and copyright, creators are invited to create legal obstacles for others to benefit from their work. Many feel that they must enforce these rights to defend their professional role and earning power.

Intellectual property legislators believe that the limits on our freedom to imitate and innovate imposed by licensing are critical to defend the revenue streams which support new creative output. However where the decision to enforce rights disadvantages paying customers, this can choke the intended commercial dividend. Naive licensing can not only restrict liberties, but actually threaten a product's success, leaving no winners at all.

Business losses from eager license enforcement can take place directly through loss of market share or reduced revenue owing to the restricted freedoms of the complexity of license management around a company's product. There may also be an opportunity cost from missing out on a potential strategic position, design improvement, customer relationship or other profit-generating mechanism. The potential to engage customers in design improvements, or to establish alternative revenue streams lubricated by openness and sharing, are easily overlooked until a competitor demonstrates their value.

In common with many industry commentators (Hacker 2000, Doctorow 2011), I believe the limitations on consumer freedoms imposed by copy-controlled digital distribution have disadvantaged the legitimate product against the more accessible and flexible, unlicensed alternative of ripping content from CDs and DVDs. As the consumers choices have played out, the emergence of liberal digital distribution and consumption mechanisms such as iTunes and the iPod has undermined the 'A&R' advantages which record labels once had as gatekeepers to the market. Mainstream sales volumes for the copyright industry are in freefall and disintermediation now threatens their existence.

Similarly, licenses which channel the contributions of many interested parties into an asset available to all, are at the core of Firefox, Google Chrome, Linux, Android, Apple's Mac OS X and iOS. Against the odds, "thriving communities...who write ...code, then give it away" (Moody 2001) have been able to erode the market share of proprietary and closed source alternatives, including those as well-resourced and dominant as Microsoft Windows and Internet Explorer, by exploiting the organising power of "technologies of cooperation" (Rheingold 2003).



It is too soon to tell if these approaches are ‘game changers’ in every industry. So far, the commercial mainstream of inventors, engineers and product designers have not adopted liberal licenses as widely as the software community. However, even if we expect their impact to be more limited, there is value in understanding the boundaries to the business terrain in which they can contribute to commercial success in these fields. 

Comparative and quantitative evidence of different licensing strategies is hard to come by. Proponents argue that the liberal licensing of well-known projects such as the linux kernel have been a defining factor in their success , but it's hard to be sure, given we cannot wind back the clock and re-run the experiment.

Despite the scarcity of actionable insight, established companies and seasoned professionals cannot rest on their laurels and continue with traditional models. Contributors across all industries need an informed standpoint concerning the flow of value in radically liberalised economies. Strategists need to weigh up which IP rights they should waive, what the form of the expected payback should be, and how they should orient their business in order to best harvest the dividend, for example facilitating "grassroots" engagement with their offering through "virtual communities" and other communications tools (Rheingold 2000). As other disruptive innovations have proven, by the time new competitors have emerged and proven the case for liberal licensing it may already be too late to defend existing markets against those playing the game-changing wildcard.

During the span of the PhD I would like to replace strategists' existing gut instincts about licensing, based principally upon the experience of content and software businesses, into a more analytically sound picture of the way intangibles can flow through businesses in general, lubricating relationships and facilitating the unlocking of new value. The intent is to collect a quantitative evidence base and begin to map a taxonomy of liberty-enhancing business models for product designs predicated on the availability of digital fabrication tools.

The studies I propose will be inevitably narrow in scope, but should harvest hard data for decision-makers articulating a licensing strategy. In particular, the evidence gathered should help businesses avoid self-defeating licensing approaches where liberal alternatives are more profitable than intellectual property enforcement.

Method
++++++

Initially, work will focus on identifying and analysing how the licensing choices for a product design are coupled to market propagation factors. These factors in turn determine the scale of a product's penetration and success. They are likely to include...

* the friction and cost of negotiating a license as a threshold to testing or adoption
* the influence on decision makers of a license's guarantees regarding future freedom of use or modification
* the propensity of individuals and trusted commentators to share promotional information about a freely-licensed product versus a commercially-licensed one
* the likelihood of feedback concerning quality or potential design improvements when the design asset is shared with the community
* the creators of complementary products seeking compatibility with products which are freely licensed in preference to those with limitations

The form of analysis for this first phase of study is closely linked to strategy choice in game theory, (Von Neumann and Morgenstern 1944) and could be led by in-silico experiments using agent-based-modelling techniques (Kreps 1990, Axelrod 1997). The results of such experiments should not only be interesting in their own right, but also help articulate the aspects of behaviour of the target audience through simplified toy worlds, which real-world experiments can directly measure in later studies.

The modelling phase should give rise to hypotheses concerning the initial conditions and parameters under which competing licensing strategies succeed or fail. Specific questions can then be posed through live market experiments. Working closely with the management school an experimental protocol will be defined for launching one or more businesses or brands, instrumented to probe the response of the market to different license offerings, and establish the degree of correlation between the model and reality.

A collection of prototype designs has already been prepared by the author whose product launch can act as a credible backbone for these experiments. One candidate is a working prototype of an Alti-Vario flight instrument intended for the hobby gliding market. Another working prototype, developed in collaboration with a ten year old entrepreneur from Wrexham as part of CBBC's My Genius Idea programme, augments the traditional keyboard with MIDI-driven LEDs which can interactively teach melodies to piano students. These products could be made available to the public on the one hand as an open design which invites imitation and variation, and on the other as a closed offering of a static product with a patented design.


Contrast with related work
++++++++++++++++++++++++++

This work is deliberately complementary to existing work in "open innovation" (Chesborough 2003) and
"user innovation" (von Hippel 2005).

Henry Chesborough (2003) emphasises the disclosure of intellectual property assets as a means of forming alliances and collaborations to maximise exploitation of a portfolio, but his manifesto largely depends upon the assumption of licensing as a revenue model.

Eric von Hippel (1988, 2005) emphasises the value of lead users' contributions to the definition and solution of commercially valuable design problems, but he does not establish particular strategies by which the liberal licensing of the organisation's own intellectual property can be used as a means of gathering and channeling user innovation to maximise profit.

The focus on the licensing of product designs also contrasts strongly with existing work understanding the economic motivations of open source contributors and analysing optimum licensing for software (Lerner and Tirole 2002,Colazon and Fang 2009). As von Hippel's evidence base demonstrates, product design is an accessible discipline without the same asymmetries between a developer and a user population. The
phenomenon of open-source invention is substantially less mature and proven than that of software, making it a rich domain for new enquiry.

Key Questions
+++++++++++++

It is not trivial to create a defensible protocol for a controlled experiment within the real digital economy. This will consume a great deal of the time, effort and collaborative work within the PhD. Simplistic approaches will fail to achieve a statistically significant data set to reduce the influence of sheer randomness on the results. On the other hand large numbers of trials targeting the same audience of decision makers could easily threaten the independence of those trials. Additionally, evidence gathered concerning audience members is likely to be impacted by self-selection bias, distorting the results compared to the population as a whole.

To mitigate some of these effects, the scale of trials can be varied. At one extreme, the impact of individual concepts on a web visitor's immediate behaviour can be tested by presenting different messages and images within a single page-impression. At the other extreme, two entirely separate campaigns and brand presences could be presented to the marketplace, each sporting a different licensing model, (but backed by the same actual product), and the aggregate effect of the campaigns as a whole can be measured.

Profile
+++++++

I am a contributor and user of open source and public domain design projects, with ten years of industry experience as a commercial inventor, platform architect and product designer. I was originally recruited into industrial research through my academic work in agent-based modelling and artificial evolutionary systems at the University of Sussex.

My experience in industry and the maker community spans the whole spectrum of perspectives on licensing. At one extreme, my work at BT Labs has led to a number of granted patents and the prototyping and deployment of a great deal of trade secret and privately licensed technologies. At the other extreme, I am an author and maintainer of software, workshop facilitator and hacker for open source projects built on Arduino and Processing, creator of the Enigmaker public domain invention project, and the Tacticalendar - a Creative Commons BY-NC-SA-licensed design for a laser-cut consumer product.

As a lead contributor and instigator of emerging technology projects, my role blends naturally into that of the technology strategist, marketeer and entrepreneur, attempting to drive cashflow through the technologies I create. This last perspective is definitive in the scoping of the proposed project. Decisions around the liberal sharing of IPR lack the hard numerical certainties of the profit and loss accounting for conventional markets, and no established heuristics seem to exist which can help structure the decision to proceed on a given licensing strategy.


Relevance to Highwire
+++++++++++++++++++++

Highwire's post-disciplinary approach, with a focus on the intersection between the digital, design thinking and business organisation, offers a perfect environment for my studies to develop and be challenged by informed and interested colleagues.

I have an established body of work and a history of engagement in open source, rapid prototyping, design and business strategy, but I am passionate about the opportunity to collaborate with others who arrive at the same problem but with different momentum. I trust the skills I've developed as an entrepreneur, prototypist and facilitator during my industrial and voluntary work will can be an asset to others' projects too.

As a visiting scientist for BT at MIT Media Lab I learned to respect the insights that emerge from diversity combined with the faith that the deepest problems will succumb to analysis if they are simply approached from the right angle. The students and staff I have met at Highwire combine hacker culture with academic rigour in a similarly powerful way. Having recently relocated to Lancaster, I'm exploring a number of opportunities to work with Highwire at the time of writing, and although I very much hope my PhD application is successful, I am committed to establishing a productive relationship with the LICA and Info21 community.
